roles/web-nginx/doc/vhost_standard.md, before:

# Ansible role: web-nginx


### Specific parameters: standard proxy virtual host

Related templates:  
* **web-nginx/templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard.conf.j2**  
  (with http => https redirect, and let's encrypt support)
* **web-nginx/templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard_no_ssl.conf.j2**  
  (only http, no ssl support)

The role will use the template to create one file per server_name,  with the required configuration for a http virtual host working as a reverse proxy using the proxy_pass command.  
Required settings for ssl activation are also integrated.

The parameters are the same as for the vhost-reverse templates, aside the `proxypass` parameter.  
All the specific configuration will go through the use of the `raw_settings` parameter.


| Parameter | Description | Type | Default value |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- | ------------- |
| `<group_name>_nginx` | list of virtual host definitions | list[ object ] | [ ] |
| - | domain name | server_name: "www.domain.tld" | mandatory |
| - | template to use for the virtual host.<br />Example: "templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard.conf.j2" | site_vhost_template: "string" | mandatory |
| - | domain aliases.<br />Example: [ 'domain2.tld', 'domain3.tld', '...' ] | server_alias: [ "string" ] | [ ] |
| - | listen ip address (v4 or v6) or unix socket.<br />Default is set to '*' for all addresses | listen_ip: "string" | "*" |
| - | alternate log directory.<br />Only specified if different than /var/log/nginx" | site_vhost_log_dir: "string" | "/var/log/nginx" |
| - | additional modules.<br />Same as the nginx_global_modules_activate variable| extra_modules: [ "string" ] | [ ] |
| - | activation status<br />If set to no, the existing virtual host will be deactivated | active: boolean | yes |
| - | ssl certificate. Path to the public certificate in text format.<br />Example: "/etc/path/to/cert.pem" | ssl_cert_pem: "string" | "" |
| - | ssl certificate. Path to the private key in text format.<br />Example: "/etc/path/to/cert.key" | ssl_cert_key: "string" | "" |
| - | Filter access using ip addresses | corp_access: boolean | no |
| - | Raw nginx parameters, taken as-is.<br />Each line must be terminated with a ";" | raw_settings: [ "string" ] | [ ] |


The site_vhost_template parameter can target one of the provided templates, or a custom one from another role.  
In this case, the full path must be specified.  

If you use an external custom template, extra properties can be provided. They will be accessible in the templates under `{{ thisVhost.my_custom_property }}`


**IP access filtering**  

This is useable only when the `.corp_access` parameter is activated.
In this state, all connections will be refused by nginx unless the source IP is a member of one of the following whitelists.


| Parameter | Description | Type | Default value |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- | ------------- |
| nginx_global_access_ip_list | list of specific or corporate IP to be allowed to connect | list:<br/>- { ip: "x.x.x.x", description: "text" } | [ ] |
| `<group_name>_web_access_ip_list` | list of ip to allow to connect to the instance.<br />This is complementary to the nginx_global_access_ip_list parameter.<br />While defined per group, is applied for the whole server. | list:<br />- { ip: "x.x.x.x",  description: "site A" }<br />- { ip: "y.y.y.y/24",  description: "Network B" } | [ ] |


Single ip addresses and CIDR ranges are supported : 10.11.12.13, 10.11.12.0/24, ...  
Notice: nginx accepts a single IP specified as a /32 range, like 10.11.12.13/32, but it might require to remove the /32 range to have it working correctly.


---
## Usage examples

the examples are valid for any host member of the "mygroup" inventory group.  


### Standard vhost usage

```
my_server_name: "vhost.domain.tld"
app_listen_ip: "127.0.0.1"
app_listen_port: "3000"


mygroup_nginx:
  - server_name: "{{ my_server_name }}"
    site_vhost_template: "roles/web-nginx/templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard_no_ssl.conf.j2"
    # notice : using yaml scalars is valid, but it can have sometime unexpected effects
    raw_settings: 
      - 'client_max_body_size 10M;'
      - 'location / {'
      - '  root  /var/lib/www;'
      - '  index  index.html index.htm;'
      - '}'

```

Commit message:

role web-nginx: SECURITY removal of a wrongly placed add_headers disabling all other headers + centralization of proxy_http_version parameter + new parameters for ssl ciphers, protocols and others + fix of the raw_settings indentation

roles/web-nginx/doc/vhost_standard.md, after:

# Ansible role: web-nginx


### Specific parameters: standard proxy virtual host

Related templates:  
* **web-nginx/templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard.conf.j2**  
  (with http => https redirect, and let's encrypt support)
* **web-nginx/templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard_no_ssl.conf.j2**  
  (only http, no ssl support)

The role will use the template to create one file per server_name,  with the required configuration for a http virtual host working as a reverse proxy using the proxy_pass command.  
Required settings for ssl activation are also integrated.

The parameters are the same as for the vhost-reverse templates, aside the `proxypass` parameter.  
All the specific configuration will go through the use of the `raw_settings` parameter.


| Parameter | Description | Type | Default value |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- | ------------- |
| `<group_name>_nginx` | list of virtual host definitions | list[ object ] | [ ] |
| - | domain name | server_name: "www.domain.tld" | mandatory |
| - | template to use for the virtual host.<br />Example: "templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard.conf.j2" | site_vhost_template: "string" | mandatory |
| - | domain aliases.<br />Example: [ 'domain2.tld', 'domain3.tld', '...' ] | server_alias: [ "string" ] | [ ] |
| - | listen ip address (v4 or v6) or unix socket.<br />Default is set to '*' for all addresses | listen_ip: "string" | "*" |
| - | alternate log directory.<br />Only specified if different than /var/log/nginx" | site_vhost_log_dir: "string" | "/var/log/nginx" |
| - | additional modules.<br />Same as the nginx_global_modules_activate variable| extra_modules: [ "string" ] | [ ] |
| - | activation status<br />If set to no, the existing virtual host will be deactivated | active: boolean | yes |
| - | ssl certificate. Path to the public certificate in text format.<br />Example: "/etc/path/to/cert.pem" | ssl_cert_pem: "string" | "" |
| - | ssl certificate. Path to the private key in text format.<br />Example: "/etc/path/to/cert.key" | ssl_cert_key: "string" | "" |
| - | Filter access using ip addresses | corp_access: boolean | no |
| - | Raw nginx parameters, taken as-is.<br />Each line must be terminated with a ";" | raw_settings: [ "string" ] | [ ] |


The site_vhost_template parameter can target one of the provided templates, or a custom one from another role.  
In this case, the full path must be specified.  

If you use an external custom template, extra properties can be provided. They will be accessible in the templates under `{{ thisVhost.my_custom_property }}`


**IP access filtering**  

This is useable only when the `.corp_access` parameter is activated.
In this state, all connections will be refused by nginx unless the source IP is a member of one of the following whitelists.


| Parameter | Description | Type | Default value |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- | ------------- |
| nginx_global_access_ip_list | list of specific or corporate IP to be allowed to connect | list:<br/>- { ip: "x.x.x.x", description: "text" } | [ ] |
| `<group_name>_web_access_ip_list` | list of ip to allow to connect to the instance.<br />This is complementary to the nginx_global_access_ip_list parameter.<br />While defined per group, is applied for the whole server. | list:<br />- { ip: "x.x.x.x",  description: "site A" }<br />- { ip: "y.y.y.y/24",  description: "Network B" } | [ ] |


Single ip addresses and CIDR ranges are supported : 10.11.12.13, 10.11.12.0/24, ...  
Notice: nginx accepts a single IP specified as a /32 range, like 10.11.12.13/32, but it might require to remove the /32 range to have it working correctly.


---
## Usage examples

the examples are valid for any host member of the "mygroup" inventory group.  


### Standard vhost usage

```
my_server_name: "vhost.domain.tld"
app_listen_ip: "127.0.0.1"
app_listen_port: "3000"


mygroup_nginx:
  - server_name: "{{ my_server_name }}"
    site_vhost_template: "roles/web-nginx/templates/etc/nginx/sites-available/vhost-standard_no_ssl.conf.j2"
    # notice : using yaml scalars is valid, but it can have sometime unexpected effects
    raw_settings: 
      - 'client_max_body_size 10M;'
      - 'location / {'
      - '  root  /var/lib/www;'
      - '  index  index.html index.htm;'
      - '}'

      - |
        # example with a YAML scalar
        location /test {
          # ... list of nginx params ...
        }

      - |
        # The template expects an array of strings
        # to use yaml scalars, an array of scalars is expected
        # ... another list of nginx params ...

```
