roles/_include-data_move_location/README.md, before:

# Ansible role: _include-data_move_location


Move a given directory to another location, and create a symlink to alleviate the location change.  

Unless forced, the source data will not be moved if the target already contains existing data. Instead, an error will be raised.


## Restrictions and limitations

This role is not meant to be used as-is, but to be called by another role as a function.

Insert a call in your tasks with the following command:
```
# import the package install role
- include_role: name=_include-data_move_location
  vars:
    <parameters>
```


## Requirements

None.


## Parameters


### Mandatory parameters

| Parameter | Description | Type |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- |
| arg_move_data_comment | The task name title for each task execution in the ansible output.<br />While it can be omitted, it will be visible as a "CHANGE_ME" comment | "string" |
| arg_move_data_source_path | Source directory to move. The full path is expected | "string" |
| arg_move_data_dest_path | Destination path to move to the source directory | "string" |



### Optional parameters

| Parameter | Description | Type | Default value |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- | ------------- |
| arg_move_data_service_stop |  System service to stop when the data must be moved.<br />The service will not be restarted by this role | "string" | "" |
| arg_move_data_dest_owner | Owner of the destination directory.<br />The user must already exists | "string" | "root" |
| arg_move_data_dest_group | Group of the destination directory.<br />The group must already exists | "string" | "root" |
| arg_move_data_dest_owner_group_update_recursive | Propagate recursively the user and group.<br />Only apply if the destination type is a directory | boolean | no |
| arg_move_data_dest_mode | Access mode (octal) of the destination directory. | "string" | "0755" |
| arg_move_data_dest_type | Destination type | "directory" or "file" |  "directory" |
| arg_move_data_create_symlink | Create a symlink redirecting from "old location" => "new location" | boolean | yes |
| arg_move_data_both_exist_fail | Conflict: when both the source and destination exist with data inside, raise an error and halt the execution | boolean | yes |
| arg_move_data_both_exist_delete_source | Conflict : Ignore the source - rename to <source>-dist and proceed, ignoring the content<br />`arg_move_data_both_exist_fail` must also be set to `no` | boolean | no 
| arg_move_data_both_exist_delete_dest | Conflict: Ignore the destination if already existing - it will be deleted<br />`arg_move_data_both_exist_fail` must also be set to `no` | boolean | no |

While the role is meant for handling directories, moving a single file is also supported.


## Usage examples

Moving the MySQL /etc/mysql configuration directory to a dedicated filesystem under /server.

```
- name: MySQL/MariaDB | move location - config dir
  include_role: name=_include-data_move_location
  vars:
    arg_move_data_comment: "MySQL/MariaDB - conf"
    arg_move_data_source_path: "/etc/mysql"
    arg_move_data_dest_path: "/server/mysql/conf"
    arg_move_data_dest_owner: "root"
    arg_move_data_dest_group: "root"
    arg_move_data_dest_mode: "0755"
    arg_move_data_service_stop: "mysql.service"
    # the source is not really deleted but renamed to -dist
    arg_move_data_both_exist_delete_source: yes
    arg_move_data_both_exist_fail: no
```

Same with the /var/lib/mysql database directory 

```
- name: MySQL/MariaDB | move location - data dir
  include_role: name=_include-data_move_location
  vars:
    arg_move_data_comment: "MySQL/MariaDB - data"
    arg_move_data_source_path: "/var/lib/mysql"
    arg_move_data_dest_path: "/server/mysql/data"
    arg_move_data_dest_owner: "mysql"
    arg_move_data_dest_group: "mysql"
    # propagate the user:group to all files and directories under the destination
    arg_move_data_dest_owner_group_update_recursive: yes
    arg_move_data_dest_mode: "0750"
    arg_move_data_service_stop: "mysql.service"
    # no automatic action with the data, will be managed manually
```


# Licence and informations

Provided in the [meta file](meta/main.yml)

Commit message:

role _include-data_move_location: readme additions about symlinks and existing data

roles/_include-data_move_location/README.md, after:

# Ansible role: _include-data_move_location

Move a given directory to another location, and create a symlink behind to alleviate the location change.  
It is usually desired with system packages to move the data and configuration files from the default location to a dedicated drive, without the need of dedicated mount points.  


The initial configuration will not move the source if the target already contains existing data. Instead, an error will be raised.  
Multiple parameter can be activated if necessary, to fine tune the behavior when facing different situations.  
Such as reinstalling a fresh system while having the existing data kept on a secondary drive.


## Restrictions and limitations

This role is not meant to be used as-is, but to be called by another role as a function.

Insert a call in your tasks with the following command:
```
# import the package install role
- include_role: name=_include-data_move_location
  vars:
    <parameters>
```

Please note there still exist programs and binaries not working well with the use of symlinks.  
In such case, it might be necessary to update the configuration files of such programs to target directly the final location, and use the symlink just as a reminder.
Some programs also accept a symlink in the path, as long as it is not the target itself. See if positionning the symlink one directory higher can work, when possible.


## Requirements

None.


## Parameters


### Mandatory parameters

| Parameter | Description | Type |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- |
| arg_move_data_comment | The task name title for each task execution in the ansible output.<br />While it can be omitted, it will be visible as a "CHANGE_ME" comment | "string" |
| arg_move_data_source_path | Source directory to move. The full path is expected | "string" |
| arg_move_data_dest_path | Destination path to move to the source directory | "string" |



### Optional parameters

| Parameter | Description | Type | Default value |
| --------- | ----------- | ---- | ------------- |
| arg_move_data_service_stop |  System service to stop when the data must be moved.<br />The service will not be restarted by this role | "string" | "" |
| arg_move_data_dest_owner | Owner of the destination directory.<br />The user must already exists | "string" | "root" |
| arg_move_data_dest_group | Group of the destination directory.<br />The group must already exists | "string" | "root" |
| arg_move_data_dest_owner_group_update_recursive | Propagate recursively the user and group.<br />Only apply if the destination type is a directory | boolean | no |
| arg_move_data_dest_mode | Access mode (octal) of the destination directory. | "string" | "0755" |
| arg_move_data_dest_type | Destination type | "directory" or "file" |  "directory" |
| arg_move_data_create_symlink | Create a symlink redirecting from "old location" => "new location" | boolean | yes |
| arg_move_data_both_exist_fail | Conflict: when both the source and destination exist with data inside, raise an error and halt the execution | boolean | yes |
| arg_move_data_both_exist_delete_source | Conflict : Ignore the source - rename to <source>-dist and proceed, ignoring the content<br />`arg_move_data_both_exist_fail` must also be set to `no` | boolean | no 
| arg_move_data_both_exist_delete_dest | Conflict: Ignore the destination if already existing - it will be deleted<br />`arg_move_data_both_exist_fail` must also be set to `no` | boolean | no |

While the role is meant for handling directories, moving a single file is also supported.


## Usage examples

Moving the MySQL /etc/mysql configuration directory to a dedicated filesystem under /server.

```
- name: MySQL/MariaDB | move location - config dir
  include_role: name=_include-data_move_location
  vars:
    arg_move_data_comment: "MySQL/MariaDB - conf"
    arg_move_data_source_path: "/etc/mysql"
    arg_move_data_dest_path: "/server/mysql/conf"
    arg_move_data_dest_owner: "root"
    arg_move_data_dest_group: "root"
    arg_move_data_dest_mode: "0755"
    arg_move_data_service_stop: "mysql.service"
    # the source is not really deleted but renamed to -dist
    arg_move_data_both_exist_delete_source: yes
    arg_move_data_both_exist_fail: no
```

Same with the /var/lib/mysql database directory 

```
- name: MySQL/MariaDB | move location - data dir
  include_role: name=_include-data_move_location
  vars:
    arg_move_data_comment: "MySQL/MariaDB - data"
    arg_move_data_source_path: "/var/lib/mysql"
    arg_move_data_dest_path: "/server/mysql/data"
    arg_move_data_dest_owner: "mysql"
    arg_move_data_dest_group: "mysql"
    # propagate the user:group to all files and directories under the destination
    arg_move_data_dest_owner_group_update_recursive: yes
    arg_move_data_dest_mode: "0750"
    arg_move_data_service_stop: "mysql.service"
    # no automatic action with the data, will be managed manually
```


# Licence and informations

Provided in the [meta file](meta/main.yml)
